Use MUI in `Toolbar` examples (#1382)
iTwin/stratakit: apps/website/src/content/docs/components/stratakit/Toolbar.md

Reviewer: An additional example with a `Select` or `NativeSelect` would be great.

Author: During today's weekly accessibility review we have agreed, that we could use both `Select` and `Menu` components.  However, the semantics should follow the pattern that includes https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/Reference/Roles/menuitemradio_role
`Menu` should be used preferably, because it aligns closer with the needed semantics (and the name aligns better). Additionally documentation recommends using `Select` for forms, while `Menu` is recommended for actions (which is a better fit for toolbar).

Author: Side note:
Some limitations were discovered while trying to use the `Select` component in `Toolbar`:
- `ref` is not allowed (by definitions) in https://mui.com/material-ui/api/select/#select-prop-SelectDisplayProps. If provided, it overrides internal MUI ref w/o merging.
- `onKeyDown` provided via `SelectDisplayProps` overrides default MUI behavior (instead of merging the handlers)

Author: [Add Toolbar.menu example](https://github.com/iTwin/stratakit/commit/4c898924fc64b5111076852250fc6e9dd391f4ed)

Reviewer: The Menu's trigger should use `size="small"` to match the original design, and the MenuItem should use the [`selected`](https://mui.com/material-ui/api/menu-item/#menu-item-prop-selected) prop (in addition to `aria-checked`) instead of manually rendering an icon.

Author: Ah, I meant to leave a reply that we should probably do some theme work for checkbox/radio menu items.

[Rm menuitem icons and use small size](https://github.com/iTwin/stratakit/pull/1382/commits/4f83898e1eeb96dfc8db63cc441f18b47bd6b4de)

For now there will be no checkmark.

Reviewer: Will https://github.com/iTwin/stratakit/pull/1471 solve the checkmark issue?

Author: yes, although it would be great to include new examples explaining (and showcasing) checkbox and radio items in that PR

<img width="255" height="154" alt="Screenshot 2026-05-11 at 09 50 31" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/66e6ae8c-f32d-4503-82db-119c9d7947b7" />

Reviewer: This example should also use the [dense menu](https://stratakit.bentley.com/docs/components/menu/#dense)?

Author: [Dense menu](https://github.com/iTwin/stratakit/pull/1382/commits/15df2a511c95f63e250efd5dfa4d0b84d3986398)

---

::example{src="structures/Toolbar.default"}

## Examples

### ToggleButton

> Use the [`render`](/reference/structures/Toolbar#Toolbar.Item.render) prop of the [`Toolbar.Item`](/reference/structures/Toolbar#Toolbar.Item) component to display individual items within the toolbar.

Reviewer: `render` prop is not used only for `ToggleButton`. This should go under general guidance instead of being tucked under here.

Author: - [Move render prop descr under general guidance](https://github.com/iTwin/stratakit/pull/1382/commits/fef14c805ffdec19296f9538e9af280bee749b41)
- [Add general component description](https://github.com/iTwin/stratakit/pull/1382/commits/984ba6670825e9e1d1ca9475073f1a29448a96f0)

Additional unrelated, but important: [Link to Toolbar component page from other components](https://github.com/iTwin/stratakit/pull/1382/commits/af8e023f778b77192ced4cd5235b1d768f45c59f)

Reviewer: > Additional unrelated, but important: [Link to Toolbar component page from other components](https://github.com/iTwin/stratakit/pull/1382/commits/af8e023f778b77192ced4cd5235b1d768f45c59f)

Not sure about this change specifically. The `Toolbar` component is currently focused on a very specific kind of use case, whereas `role="toolbar"` covers all kinds of toolbars. For example, the secondary actions in `TreeItem` are rendered in a `role="toolbar"` element that's not using the `Toolbar` component.

Author: If there are any other types/styles of toolbars, I'd assume those should firstly be covered by the design and secondly would probably be implemented using the `Toolbar` component as a base (or maybe even exposed as a variant)?

The argument about `TreeItem` not using the `Toolbar` component is not strong enough, because there are other reasons as well (no dependency on MUI, implemented before MUI). This applies to literally any brick component used in structures as well.

Reviewer: If you're talking about visuals, toolbars don't always need special "design". And the `TreeItem` is just one example that came to mind. Anything can be turned into a `toolbar` — a `ButtonGroup`, or even just an unstyled row of buttons. Toolbars are useful mainly for reducing the number of tab stops when there are lots of buttons.

To reiterate my main point:

> The `Toolbar` component is currently focused on a very specific kind of use case, whereas `role="toolbar"` covers all kinds of toolbars.

Until (and unless) the `Toolbar` component evolves to support additional use cases, this change is just misleading consumers.

Even if you feel strongly about this for some reason, this change looks out of scope for this PR.

Author: My main point with linking the component rather than role, is - we use that approach in all other places, e.g. we are linking to `Button` component rather than `<button>` or `role="button"` (even if generic button could be used, that is not based on our component).

Reviewer: Hmm, I don't think we would use `Button` rather than `<button>` if the component is not appropriate (i.e. when the styling is undesirable). Same goes for `Link`. For example, if we are recommending `render={<a />}`, we should be documenting the `<a>` element explicitly.

Author: Well, in the `Use cases` table the recommendation for "Call-to-action" links to the `Button` component, not `<button>` element: https://stratakit.bentley.com/docs/components/iconbutton/#use-cases
I don't see how `Toolbar` is different.

Bonus point: we linked to `Toolbar` component in the original docs as well.

Reviewer: Those use cases are specifically for the `Button` component, not for the `<button>` element.

Author: [Revert "Link to Toolbar component page from other components"](https://github.com/iTwin/stratakit/pull/1382/commits/fcfae80b40382581d3a6c399bd776771e7cdb5f8)

In the example below, one of the toolbar items is rendered as a [**ToggleButton**](/components/togglebutton/).

::example{src="structures/Toolbar.toggle"}

### Divider

Use the [**Divider**](/components/divider/) component to visually and semantically separate groups of items within the toolbar.

> ::example{src="structures/Toolbar.divider"}

Reviewer: The most noticeable change in this example is the vertical orientation, not the divider. Divider can, of course, be added here, but is not the main focus.

Author: I've separated divider and orientation examples. Divider example uses a horizontal toolbar and is moved before orientation example, since I've kept the divider in the vertical/orientation example as well.

- [Simplify the divider example](https://github.com/iTwin/stratakit/pull/1382/commits/d0d477303191fdc8864f4213bbfc0af582788041)
- [Move divider example up](https://github.com/iTwin/stratakit/pull/1382/commits/7b9ccd384c47cc78f4c1b7c8a195040e28f819d1)
- [Add vertical example (previously called divider)](https://github.com/iTwin/stratakit/pull/1382/commits/3e26b1a68207ae824ef83b046b43f5f3c310fc15)
- [Add orientation docs](https://github.com/iTwin/stratakit/pull/1382/commits/c33692bb1033ef7fb3d0563b471866d0d739dc62)

---

::example{src="structures/Toolbar.default"}

The **Toolbar** component groups related interactive elements together. It follows the [ARIA Toolbar pattern](https://www.w3.org/WAI/ARIA/apg/patterns/toolbar/) for reducing the number of tab stops.

Use the [`render`](/reference/structures/Toolbar#Toolbar.Item.render) prop of the [`Toolbar.Item`](/reference/structures/Toolbar#Toolbar.Item) component to display individual items within the toolbar.

## Examples

### Divider

Use the [**Divider**](/components/divider/) component to visually and semantically separate groups of items within the toolbar.

::example{src="structures/Toolbar.divider"}

:::note[Divider orientation]

> The divider should be perpendicular to the **Toolbar**. [Reorientate](/components/divider/#orientation) it when changing the **Toolbar's** [orientation](#orientation).

Reviewer: nit: "reorient" or "reorientate"? I'm more used to the former in American English, but the latter also looks valid in British English.

Author: I've borrowed "reorientate" since it is already used in `Divider.md`. Although, the word itself is repeated "too much" (after messing around with `Ctrl+F`)
[Reword to avoid orientation/reorientate soup.](https://github.com/iTwin/stratakit/pull/1382/commits/3f8f423fa03c7ee02a0cd455f4b344026e7e9d80)

:::

### Orientation

By default, the **Toolbar** is horizontal. Use the [`orientation`](/reference/structures/Toolbar#Toolbar.Group.orientation) prop to change it to vertical.

> Additionally, adjust tooltip placement to avoid overlapping the **Toolbar** and make the [divider perpendicular](#divider).

Reviewer: bolding components + "divider perpendicular" reads weird

```suggestion
Additionally, adjust the **Tooltip's** placement to avoid overlapping the **Toolbar**, and change the [**Divider's** orientation](#divider) to make it perpendicular to the **Toolbar**.
```

::example{src="structures/Toolbar.vertical" min-height="250px"}

> In the example above, `labelPlacement="right"` is set on [**IconButtons**](/components/iconbutton/) and the [**Divider**](/components/divider/) retains its default horizontal orientation.

Reviewer: this is not the first mention of Divider

```suggestion
In the example above, `labelPlacement="right"` is set on [**IconButtons**](/components/iconbutton/) and the **Divider** retains its default horizontal orientation.
```
